In the meantime let's do a little bit of work in our Python code to make this table a little bit more
clear.
Let's visualize our correlations in a way that we could put into a really snazzy report and to do this.
We're going to represent our correlations as a triangle instead of this whole table here.
We don't need to show all these duplicate values showing all these duplicate values doesn't really add
anything.
And it just makes the whole thing look really really busy.
So my goal is to hide half of this table and to accomplish this I will create an array which will help
me filter out the values that I don't want to show and the values that I want to show.
I'm going to call this filter array mask and I'm going to set it equal to an array that's identical
in size to this table of correlations.
This correlation matrix that we've got up here.
The module that I will use to help me do this is called num pi.
I'm going to have to add this to my notebook imports at the top in order to use it.
So when I see import num Pi has an P had shift enter on this import this module scroll back down here
and then I'm going to use the zeros like function from the NUM pi module so right end p dot zeros on
a school like and this function will create an array of zeros that is like whatever array is passed
into this function as a parameter in our case that's gonna be the return value from calling the correlation
method on our data frame.
So let's have a look at what this mask array looks like at the moment let's shift into here and we can
see that we have an array of well just zeros.
Now I need to make another modification to filter on the values in the top triangle.
First each know the indices of these cells in my array.
Thankfully there is another number pi function that will help me find these.
So going to say triangle underscore indices which is going to hold on to all the indices in the top
triangle of my array and then set that equal to num pi dot p r i you try to underscore indices on the
score from and then when I pass in my mask this will retrieve the indices for the top triangle of the
array.
And now that I've got my indices I can use my mascara to select just those cells and change their values.
So as a mask.
Square brackets and then triangle underscore indices and set those equal to true.
Let me show you what our filter looks like now.
So when I say mask it shift enter and then you can see here that the top triangle in this array has
the value 1 and the bottom triangle has the value 0.
And that's because true is mapped to the value 1 and False is mapped to an American value of 0 so with
this in hand I can now move on to creating this beautiful visualization that I keep talking about.
We're gonna use our old friends Seabourn and map plot lib to accomplish this.
The first thing I want to do is I'm going to set the size of our figure.
So I'm going to say PDT.
Don't figure parentheses fixed size is equal to 16 by 10.
And then we use our C Bourne's heat map function to generate a heat map of our correlations.
We had the seaborne modulus S.A. and then I could get a dot after it and write heat map and then within
the parentheses I'm going to provide our correlations.
So this was the value returned by calling the core method on our data frame.
So when I leave it like this as an as thought a heat map parentheses data dot core and then I'm going
to show our plot with PDT.
Don't show let me hit shift into to see what this looks like.
Voila look at that.
We're almost there.
What we can see already is that the different colors show us a strong positive correlations have a dark
red color and the negative strong correlations have a dark blue color.
Anything that's close to zero is pale or white to this color scheme is actually conveying quite a lot
of information already which is really really neat on the visualization front.
Now if you're having trouble reading what it says down the sides and at the bottom of this chart we
can increase the font size of these labels with BLT dot X takes parentheses font size equals 14 and
I can do the same for the y axis with BLT Dot.
Y ticks parentheses font size equals 14 hitting shift enter.
We see it updated like so.
So now it's a bit easier to read.
Now it's time to add that mask that we created.
We want to hide the correlations on this chart that are duplicates coming back up him inside the heat
map method.
I'm going to add another argument we're gonna say mask so the argument called mask is equal to
the mask that we've so painstakingly created in the cell above so mask is equal to mask and this might
look very confusing but this mask here refers to our variable in this cell here and this python code
reading mask equals refers to the name of the key word in this function.
Let me shift into and show you what this looks like.
Well now we've effectively hidden half of our chart.
So when it modifies even further I'm gonna add the actual values of our correlations on our heat map
because what I want to do is what I want to display these numbers here on our chart with the colors
so messy and not is equal to true and head shift into how you'll see the values of the correlations
being displayed in the heat map.
Of course by default these numbers actually get really small and difficult to read.
No why.
It's just how it is so we can increase their font size with another keyword argument so we can see not
underscore k.
Double U S is equal to and then curly braces quotes.
Size colon and then 14 14.
It's gonna be the font size of our annotations.
The value of this are not on the score kW s argument is given as a dictionary.
It's a python dictionary that we're looking at here and you can always spot Python dictionaries very
very easily with this kind of curly bracket notation and a key value pair or some key value pairs inside.
The key here is the string size and the value is 14.
These are always separated by this colon.
Let me shift into an update.
The heat map now.
What a brilliant.
Now the only thing I find a little bit strange is who hired this background here is not all white because
I expected the styling to be a little bit different.
I expected this to be a white background instead of this gray hair.
Now if you're also seeing something a little bit unexpected like this and the styling front you can
always set the style manually of seaborne with S.A. stunt set on a school style parentheses and then
provide the name of a style.
So I'm going to go with white and it shift into that line of code should force this background color
here to be set to white.
But you know the thing is all in all writing this python code with the mask and with Seabourn and the
heat map it's kind of like the easy part actually.
The much harder part is making sense of what it is that we're actually looking at here.
What is it that we can learn from this correlation matrix.
So first off you and I we said we're gonna be looking at two things strength and direction.
An example of a strong positive correlation would be something like an O x and Indus.
Now this Indus feature measures the proportion of non retail business acres per town and this new X
feature measures the nitric oxide concentration in parts per 10 million.
At least that's me reading it off the documentation on the feature descriptions.
These two features have a correlation of zero point seven six.
So the question is does this make sense and I think.
Yeah.
Yeah it does.
I would expect the pollution to be higher in industrial areas.
The amount of industry and the amount of pollution should be positively correlated but looking at this
table a little bit more.
You know what I found quite interesting.
It's the correlation of tax and the industry variable higher tax levels are apparently associated with
more industrial areas.
I actually found this quite surprising.
So coming across these kind of relationships is why the correlation matrix is a useful tool for data
exploration but there are of course has with everything some limitations looking at this heat map here.
We can see that the highest correlation of all is the correlation between tax and rad access to radio
highways.
This is a positive correlation of zero point nine one which seems super high.
How.
Remember how we looked at the documentation of this correlation function.
We went up here and we had shift tab and we learned that the default method for calculating this correlation
is the Pearson method.
Now it turns out that one of the things that you have to know about this type of correlation is that
it makes some assumptions about the kind of data that it's running on.
This correlation calculation is actually only valid for continuous variables and this means that it's
not valid for C like a dummy variable like whether a property is on the Charles River or not because
this is not a continuous variable it's only got two values right.
0 or 1 and looking back up here where we've created our histogram for accessibility to radial highways
we can also see that this is not a continuous variable.
This feature was an index.
If you remember and what this means is that our correlation calculation is actually not valid for the
RFD feature because RAD is not a continuous variable which goes to show that it's very important to
know how the individual features are measured what units they're in and what the distribution of the
data looks like for these features because we can only use statistical tools that are appropriate for
the kind of data you're working with.
Okay so let's look at this last row down here.
The row that reads price which is our target value on this row you see the correlation of all the features
in our model with the price with our target.
One of the things that I'm interested in looking for here is four which features we we don't find a
relationship for which of the features is the correlation close to zero the lowest correlation of course
is with the Charles River dummy variable.
But as we've just said Charles is a dummy variable with only values between 1 and 0.
So the correlation measure is actually not appropriate.
But what about the next lowest one.
The next lost one is this one called D I S and D I S is defined as the distance from employment centers
now.
That's interesting.
So DHS is not very correlated with price but DHS is very highly correlated with the industry feature.
Looking here we see that there is a correlation of minus zero point seven one between DHS and index.
The reason I suspect this is the case is because many industrial areas are probably employment centers
so being far away from an employment center is associated with a low amount of industry and this discovery
adds something to my to do list for the regression analysis stage.
What we should probably do is we should check if our distance feature adds explanatory value to our
regression model in other words does having both the industry feature and the distance feature included
in the regression make our model better or worse.
Can we get away with just having the industry feature for example.
Because the thing is if a feature is not adding any explanatory value it's often better to excluded
and trying to run the regression without it because by excluding features you might end up with a simpler
model and simplicity is usually a good thing.
Okay so where does this leave us.
The correlation matrix is no silver Data Exploration bullet.
While it may not answer all our questions it can give us a bit more perspective and the correlation
matrix has its pros and cons.
It has strengths and it has limitations.
Just like every other tool regarding the pros we've learned something about our data.
We've learned that the amount of tax and the amount of industry are correlated and we've added something
to our to do list for later namely that we should investigate if we really need the DHS feature in our
model or not.
Another pro is that we've learned that certain features with high correlations are possible sources
of multicore linearity.
Now I emphasize the word possible and this is another thing for our To Do list.
High correlations don't necessarily imply this problem of multicore linearity but we will revisit this
issue during the regression analysis stage by running a formal test for this problem.
Now we're also learning a few things about some weaknesses of looking at correlations.
For example we've learned that the correlation calculations assume continuous data.
This Pearson correlation calculation that we've looked at is not valid.
If the data is not continuous as it is the case with our accessibility index or our Charles River dummy
variable and a second limitation that everybody likes to harp on about is that correlation does not
imply causation.
Just because two things move together doesn't mean that one thing causes another.
In other words everybody who drank water in 1850 is now dead.
But this doesn't mean that drinking water will kill you.
In fact if you look at enough data and you look hard enough you will find that there are all sorts of
weird correlations out there.
Just google funny correlations or spurious correlations and you'll find a bunch of great examples of
completely unrelated things that move together purely by chance.
And if you do this you'll probably come across Tyler Vision's Web site who uses census data and data
from the U.S. Department of Agriculture to show that divorce rates in Maine and margarine consumption
are in fact highly correlated so the earlier chart of mine showing a zero correlation between these
two things was in fact Hey lie Tyler's chart shows us how it actually works now.
Another limitation of correlations is that they only check for linear relationships and it turns out
just because there's a low Pearson correlation coefficient does not mean that there is no relationship
between two variables.
Let me show you some examples so you can actually see what I mean.
Here's some fictional data on a chart showing the x and y values X and Y have a correlation of zero
point eight 1 6.
And let me tell you a different chart this is some more fictional data and the correlation between X
2 and Y 2 is in fact also zero point 8 1 6.
And on this third chart here.
You guessed it the correlation is also zero point eight 1 6 and the same goes for this 4th chart here
x 4 and y 4 also have a correlation of zero point 8 1 6.
In fact these photographs are very famous.
They're called hence Combs quartered and they're named after an English statistician who came up with
them.
These four graphs actually have very very similar descriptive statistics and a very very similar regression
line.
But of course they're showing us completely different relationships.
They're showing us that outliers and non-linear relationships often only become apparent after visualizing
the data.
And this is what this implies.
It means that it's important to look at these correlations and these descriptive statistics in conjunction
with some charts and with this in mind we're gonna be complementing our analysis of the correlation
with some more graphical analysis.
That way we can discover if there's any hidden linear relationships or outliers in our data.
As such we're gonna be visiting our old friend again the scatter plot but before we move on I can't
resist showing you this infamous comic strip from X KCET.
This is the kind of humor that appeals to you more than you'd care to admit.
Then I highly recommend subscribing to X Casey D RSS feed and get your dose of geeky web comics on a
regular basis.
I'll see you in the next lessons.
Take care.